>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 14:
REMEMBERING JUSTICE ANTONIN
SCALIA.
HIS LIFE, HIS INFLUENCE, AND HIS
PLACE IN AMERICAN LEGAL HISTORY.
AND FACT CHECKING LAST NIGHT'S
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE BODY OF SUPREME COURT
JUSTICE ANTONIN SCALIA IS
EXPECTED TO BE FLOWN HOME TO
VIRGINIA OVER THE NEXT 48 HOURS
FOLLOWING HIS SUDDEN DEATH
YESTERDAY IN TEXAS.
TO HONOR SCALIA, PRESIDENT OBAMA
ORDERED AMERICAN FLAGS TO FLY
HALF-STAFF TODAY AT THE SUPREME
COURT IN WASHINGTON AND AT
FEDERAL BUILDINGS AROUND THE
NATION.
LIKE SO MANY OTHER POLITICAL
LEADERS, PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
OFFERED HIS CONDOLENCES TO
SCALIA'S FAMILY.
BUT HE'S ALSO PROMISING TO FILL
THE VACANCY ON THE HIGH COURT.
IN AN EARLY SIGN OF A POSSIBLE
BITTER CONFIRMATION BATTLE
AHEAD, THE SENATE REPUBLICAN
MAJORITY LEADER AND REPUBLICANS
RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT ALL SAY
THE SCALIA VACANCY SHOULD BE
FILLED ONLY BY THE NEXT
PRESIDENT.
WHEN SCALIA DIED YESTERDAY OF
NATURAL CAUSES AT AGE 79, HE HAD
BEEN ON THE SUPREME COURT FOR 30
YEARS.
FROM THE MOMENT HE TOOK HIS SEAT
ON THE HIGH COURT IN 1986,
SCALIA WAS A FORCEFUL, ELOQUENT,
AND SOMETIMES CONTROVERSIAL
VOICE FOR CONSERVATIVE ISSUES.
HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS
EXTENDED INTO MANY AREAS OF
AMERICAN LIFE AND POLITICS.
SCALIA WAS IN THE FIVE-TO-FOUR
MAJORITY IN "BUSH V. GORE,"
WHICH ENDED THE 2000
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RECOUNT
AND SENT GEORGE W. BUSH TO THE
WHITE HOUSE.
HE ALSO VOTED WITH THE MAJORITY
IN STRIKING DOWN CAMPAIGN
FINANCE LAWS AS A RESTRICTION ON
FREE SPEECH.
SCALIA SHAPED LANDMARK MAJORITY
DECISIONS LIKE THE SECOND
AMENDMENT CASE THAT ENSHRINED
THE RIGHT OF INDIVIDUALS TO OWN
A GUN FOR SELF DEFENSE AND CASES
AFFIRMING THE SIXTH AMENDMENT
RIGHT OF CRIMINAL DEFENDANTS TO
CONFRONT WITNESSES AGAINST THEM.
SCALIA WAS EQUALLY CAUSTIC AND
WITTY WHEN HE WAS ON THE LOSING
SIDE, OFTEN WRITING COLORFUL
DISSENTS.
HE WAS IN THE MINORITY WHEN THE
COURT STRUCK DOWN A VIRGINIA
MILITARY ACADEMY'S POLICY OF
ADMITTING ONLY MEN AND DECIDED
GUANTANAMO PRISONERS COULD
CHALLENGE THEIR DETENTION.
HE OPPOSED DECISIONS UPHOLDING
ABORTION RIGHTS, SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE AND PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
HEALTHCARE PLAN.
THE CORNERSTONE OF SCALIA'S
LEGAL PHILOSOPHY WAS
"ORIGINALISM", A STRICT
INTERPRETATION OF THE
CONSTITUTION AS THE FRAMERS
WROTE IT IN BACK IN THE 1780's.
>> THEY NEVER TOOK OUT THESE
ISSUES: ABORTION, HOMOSEXUAL
CONDUCT.
NOBODY EVER THOUGHT THAT THEY
HAD BEEN INCLUDED IN THE RIGHTS
CONTAINED IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS.
WHICH IS WHY ABORTION,
HOMOSEXUAL SODOMY WERE CRIMINAL
FOR 200 YEARS.
>> Brangham: SCALIA OFTEN SAID
THE CONSTITUTION WAS NOT A
"LIVING DOCUMENT" TO BE RE-
INTERPRETED BY JUDGES TO FIT
CHANGING TIMES.
IN A 2012 INTERVIEW WITH THE
NEWSHOUR'S MARGARET WARNER,
SCALIA EXPLAINED HIS UNWAVERING
VIEW OF THE CONSTITUTION.
>> IF IT WAS UP TO THE COURTS TO
MAKE IT EVOLVE OVER TIME, THERE
WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN A PROVISION
FOR AMENDMENT.
IT CONTAINS A PROVISION OF
AMENDMENT PRECISELY BECAUSE THE
FRAMERS UNDERSTOOD THAT THEY MAY
FIND SOME PROVISIONS IN THE
FUTURE ARE NOT GOOD AND
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ARE
NEEDED.
>> Brangham: SCALIA WAS A
DEVOUT ROMAN CATHOLIC WHO LEAVES
BEHIND HIS WIFE, NINE CHILDREN,
AND 36 GRANDCHILDREN.
THE ONLY CHILD OF ITALIAN-
IMMIGRANTS, SCALIA WAS PROUD OF
BEING THE FIRST ITALIAN-AMERICAN
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE, AS HE
TOLD A 2015 PBS DOCUMENTARY:
>> WHEN MY CONFIRMATION WAS
FINAL, I GOT CARTLOADS OF MAIL
FROM ITALIAN-AMERICANS JUST
EXPRESSING THEIR PRIDE IN MY
APPOINTMENT.
I HAD NO IDEA THAT IT MEANT THAT
MUCH.
>> Brangham: AFTER GROWING UP
IN QUEENS, NEW YORK, SCALIA
GRADUATED FIRST IN HIS CLASS AT
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY AND THEN
WITH HIGH HONORS FROM HARVARD
LAW SCHOOL.
AFTER WORKING IN THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT AND AS A FEDERAL
JUDGE, SCALIA REACHED THE
PINNACLE OF THE LEGAL PROFESSION
WHEN PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN
NOMINATED HIM TO FILL THE
VACANCY LEFT BY RETIRING CHIEF
JUSTICE WARREN BURGER.
THE SENATE CONFIRMED HIM
UNANIMOUSLY 98-TO-ZERO.
WHEN HE DIED YESTERDAY, SCALIA
WAS THE LONGEST-SERVING OF THE
NINE SUPREME COURT JUSTICES.
>> Brangham: FOR MORE ON
JUSTICE SCALIA'S ROLE AND HIS
INFLUENCE ON THE COURT, I AM
JOINED FROM WASHINGTON D.C. BY
MARCIA COYLE, THE CHIEF
WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT FOR
"THE NATIONAL LAW JOURNAL," AND
JAMAL GREEN, A PROFESSOR AND A
VICE DEAN AT COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
LAW SCHOOL HERE IN NEW YORK.
THANK YOU BOTH FOR BEING HERE.
MARCIA, I WOULD LIKE TO START
WITH YOU.
JUST GIVE ME YOUR
TAKE ON
SCALIA'S LASTING LEGACY.
>> WELL, WILLIAM, I THINK HIS
LEGACY WILL BE IN SEVERAL AREAS.
FIRST OF ALL, AND PERHAPS MOST
IMPORTANTLY, IS HIS APPROACH TO
CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION AS
WELL AS OF STATUTES.
HE WAS WHAT HE SAID, CALLED
HIMSELF AN ORIGINALIST IN THAT
WHEN HE INTERPRETED THE
CONSTITUTION, HE WOULD LOOK AT
HOW THE WORDS OF THE
CONSTITUTION WERE UNDERSTOOD AT
THE TIME OF THE FRAMERS.
HE ALSO WAS A TEXTUALIST
MEANING HE WOULD LOOK AT THE
WORDS IN THE STATUTE AND IF THE
MEANING WAS CLEAR, THAT WAS THE
END FOR HIM.
I THINK BOTH APPROACHES REALLY
HAVE BEEN TAKEN TO HEART BY A
WHOLE GENERATION OF YOUNG LEGAL
SCHOLARS.
AND OTHERS AS WELL.
PRACTITIONERS, EVEN POLITICIANS.
HE WAS A FORCE IN CONSERVATIVE
LEGAL THOUGHT.
AND THEN ALSO I THINK HIS LEGACY
WILL BE FELT IN CERTAIN AREAS
WHERE HE LEAD THE COURT.
FOR EXAMPLE, TWO AREAS, ONE, HE
REINVIGORATED THE MEANING OF THE
CONFRONTATION CLAUSE IN THE
6th AMENDMENT.
THAT IS THE CLAUSE THAT SAYS A
CRIMINAL DEFENDANT HAS THE RIGHT
TO CONFRONT HIS OR HER ACCUSERS.
HE WOULD ACCEPT NO SUR GATS.
THE ACCUSER, WHOEVER FOR EXAMPLE
TESTED THE DNA BLOOD IN A CASE
HAD TO BE THERE ON THE WITNESS
STAND.
AND SECONDLY HE ALSO
REINVIGORATED THE ROLE OF JURIES
IN TRIALS, CRIMINAL TRIALS.
THEY WERE THE FACT FINDERS.
THEY WERE THE ONES WHO HAD
TO-- THE PROSECUTION HAD TO
PROVE BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT
ANY FACTS THAT WOULD INCREASE A
SENTENCE.
>> JAMAL GREEN, I KNOW YOU HAVE
SAID THIS IN THE PAST, THAT
SCALIA'S INFLUENCE WAS REALLY
PERHAPS GREATEST OUTSIDE OF THE
COURT AND LESS SO ON THE ACTUAL
RULINGS THEMSELVES.
CAN YOU EXPLAIN WHY THAT'S THE
CASE?
>> WELL, HE DID HAVE A NUMBER OF
MAJORITY OPINIONS THAT HE WROTE
THAT WERE SIGNIFICANT, AS MARCIA
MENTIONED, SO IN THE AREA OF THE
SECOND AMENDMENT, IN THE AREA OF
THE-- CLAUSE AND SO FORTH.
BUT I THINK WHERE JUSTICE
SCALIA'S LEGACY REALLY LIES IS
IN KIND OF POPULARIZING
CONSTITUTIONAL THEORY.
SO WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
ORIGINALISM, WE DON'T JUST TALK
ABOUT IT AMONG LAW PROFESSORS OR
JUST AMONG JUDGES.
PEOPLE, TALK SHOW HOSTS,
JOURNALISTS, POLITICIANS ARE
TALKING THE LANGUAGE OF
CONSTITUTIONAL INTERPRETATION.
>> AND THIS WAS NOT A POPULAR
THEORY WHEN HE FIRST CAME IN.
>> NO, I THINK WITHIN THE
ACADEMY WE ALL THOUGHT IT WAS
DEAD IN THE MIDDLE OF THE 1980s
BUT HE REALLY PLAYED A MAJOR
ROLE OF REINVIGORATING
ORIGINALISM, BOTH WITHIN THE
ACADEMIES, SO THERE ARE LOTS OF
SCHOLARS NOW WHO CALL THEMSELVES
ORIGINALISTS INCLUDING LIBERAL
SCHOLARS LIKE JACK BALKAN AT
YALE LAW SCHOOL WHO IS MOST
FAMOUS FOR THIS.
AND OUTSIDE OF THE ACADEMY SO
THAT THE FEDERALIST SOCIETY,
POLITICIANS TALK ABOUT
ORIGINALISM AS A KIND OF
STARTING POINT IN CONSTITUTIONAL
INTERPRETATION.
>> MARCIA, I KNOW ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WILL BE ETCHED ON
HIS STONE IS HIS INCREDIBLE WIT
AND ERUDITION AND THE RELISH HE
SEEMED TO TAKE IN THE
INTELLECTUAL JOUSTING BACK AND
FORTH.
YOU MUST HAVE SEEN HIM ARGUE
MANY A TIME.
WHAT WAS IT LIKE?
>> OH, IT WAS ALWAYS FUN.
SOMETIMES SURPRISING, STARTLING.
YOU'LL FIND THAT LAWYERS WHO
REGULARLY ARGUE BEFORE THE COURT
HAVE SAID THAT HE REALLY CREATED
THE MODEL FOR ORAL ARGUMENT.
THAT WAS VERY VIGOROUS, FAST
QUESTIONING.
AND SOMETIMES HIS COMMENTS OR
QUESTIONS COULD BE QUITE BAR
BED.
HE COULD CORRECT THOSE BARS TO
HIS COLLEAGUES AS WELL.
I NO HE THAT ONE OF HIS, JUSTICE
BRIER, FOR EXAMPLE, MENTIONED
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY AND
INTERPRETING A LAW BASED ON ITS
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY WHICH
JUSTICE SCALIA DID NOT BELIEVE
IN.
SCALIA WOULD SEND A BARB OVER TO
BRIER BUT HE WOULD JUST ROLL HIS
EYES LIKE HERE WE GO AGAIN.
AND HIS WRITING STYLE TOO.
HE WILL BE REMEMBERED FOR.
HE REALLY TOOK GREAT CARE IN HOW
HE CRAFTED HIS OPINIONS,
PARTICULARLY HIS DISSENTS WHICH
HE FELT VERY STRONGLY HE WAS
WRITING FOR THE FUTURE.
>> JAMAL GREEN, THIS, IF
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND IT IS STILL
A BIG IF, IF OBAMA GETS TO
SELECT THE NEXT JUSTICE, THIS
COULD BE A POTENTIALLY SEISMIC
SHIFT IN THE COURT, RIGHT?
>> MAYBE AS BIG A SHIFT AS HAS
EVER BEEN IN THE COURT IN TERMS
OF A SINGLE JUSTICE BEING
REPLACED.
THE SENATE REPUBLICANS WILL DO
THEIR BEST TO MAKE SURE THAT
DOESN'T HAPPEN BUT IF YOU WERE
TO HAVE PRESIDENT OBAMA PICK A
JUSTICE WHO WAS CONGENIAL
TO PRESIDENT OBAMA'S VIEWS OF
THE CONSTITUTION AND VIEWS ABOUT
LAW, HE WOULD HAVE ONE OF THE
RIGHT MOST JUSTICES IN THE
HISTORY OF THE COURT BEING
REPLACED BY SOMEONE ON THE LEFT.
AND THAT WOULD CHANGE ANY NUMBER
OF AREAS.
SOME OF WHICH ARE DEAR TO
JUSTICE SCALIA'S HEART.
YOU THINK ABOUT THE SECOND
AMENDMENT, FOR EXAMPLE, THAT
WOULD BE HIS RULING IN DISTRICT
OF COLUMBIA VERSUS HELLER WITH
BE IN JEOPARDY WERE HE TO BE
REPLACED BY SWUB ON THE LEFT
SIDE OF THE COURT.
RULINGS LIKE CITIZENS UNITED
COULD POTENTIALLY BE IN JEOPARDY
AS WELL.
COULD YOU HAVE AN ENORMOUS
SHIFT.
OF COURSE EVERYONE KNOWS WHAT
THOSE STAKES ARE.
SO THE REPUBLICANS WILL TRY
THEIR BEST TO MAKE SURE THAT
DOESN'T HAPPEN.
>> MARCIA, WHAT ABOUT, I
UNDERSTAND THAT SOME OF THE
CASES IN THE SUPREME COURT'S
CURRENT TERM ARE AS DIVISIVE AS
YOU CAN GET.
THERE IS ABORTION, CONTRACEPTION
UNIONS, IMMIGRATION.
WHAT DOES HIS ABSENCE NOW MEAN
FOR THOSE CASES GOING FORWARD?
>> WELL, IT DOES CREATE SOME
DIFFICULT PROBLEMS FOR THE
COURT.
IT ALL DEPENDS ON WHAT STAGE
SOME OF THOSE CASES WERE IN.
GENERALLY THE JUSTICES SIT DOWN
AFTER ORAL ARGUMENT RATHER
QUICKLY TO TAKE AT LEAST A
PRELIMINARY VOTE ON THE OUTCOME.
IF THEY-- JUSTICE SCALIA VOTED
ON A CASE AND THAT CASE HAS NOT
YET BEEN PUBLICLY DECIDED, HIS
VOTE WILL BE VOID.
IF IT SHOULD LEAVE A 4-4 SPLIT
ON THE COURT AND THE COURT DOES
ISSUE A 4-4 DECISION, THEN THE
LOWER COURTS RULING WILL STAND.
BUT IT WILL SET NO PRECEDENT FOR
THE REST OF THE NATION.
IT WILL ONLY BE A PRECEDENT IN
THAT PARTICULAR COURT CIRCUIT.
THE JUSTICES ALSO HAVE THE
OPTION OF ASKING FOR A
REARGUMENT IN CERTAIN CASES.
THAT HASN'T BEEN DONE IN THE
PAST.
DEPENDING ON, FOR EXAMPLE, THERE
ARE THREE CASES THAT I'M GOING
TO BE WATCHING THAT HAVE NOT
EVEN YET BEEN ARGUED BUT ALSO
ARE VERY HIGH PROFILE, THE
ABORTION CASE IS SCHEDULED FOR
MARCH 2nd.
ANOTHER CHALLENGE TO
CONTRACEPTIVE HEALTH INSURANCE
IS SCHEDULED FOR THE END OF
MARCH.
AND THEN THERE'S THE CHALLENGE
TO PRESIDENT OBAMA'S EXECUTIVE
ACTION ON IMMIGRATION WHICH
PROBABLY WILL BE ARGUED IN
APRIL. ALL THOSE, THOSE THREE
CASES ALSO HAVE THE POTENTIAL TO
DIVIDE 4-4.
SO THERE'S GOING TO BE SOME
DEFICIT FOR THE COURT.
THE COURT MAY FIND NARROWER WAYS
TO DECIDE SOME OF THOSE CASES IN
ORDER TO HAVE A MAJORITY VOTE.
WE'RE JUST GOING TO HAVE TO WAIT
TO SEE.
>> ALL RIGHT, MARCIA COYLE,
JAMAL GREEN, THANK YOU BOTH VERY
MUCH FOR BEING HERE.
>> MY PLEASURE, WILLIAM.
>> Brangham: READ REMEMBRANCES
AND REACTIONS TO THE DEATH OF
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE ANTONIN
SCALIA.
VISIT US ONLINE AT:
pbs.org/newshour
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TERM EXPIRES
IN 342 DAYS, AND ON AVERAGE, HIS
TWO SUPREME COURT PICKS, ELENA
KAGAN AND SONIA SOTOMAYOR
REQUIRED 76 DAYS FROM NOMINATION
TO CONFIRMATION.
SO, THE PRESIDENT HAS THE TIME,
AND HE SAYS, THE DESIRE TO
APPOINT SOMEONE NEW.
BUT ALREADY, REPUBLICAN SENATE
MAJORITY LEADER MITCH MCCONNELL
HAS INDICATED HE'S NOT INCLINED
TO SCHEDULE CONFIRMATION
HEARINGS OR A VOTE FOR A NEW
NOMINEE, BECAUSE, HE SAYS THE
VACANCY SHOULD BE FILLED BY THE
NEXT PRESIDENT, NOT THE CURRENT
ONE.
FOR MORE ON THIS BREWING
SHOWDOWN, I'M JOINED FROM
WASHINGTON BY THE NEWSHOUR'S
POLITICAL DIRECTOR LISA
DESJARDINS.
WELCOME, THANKS FOR BEING HERE.
WE SAW ALREADY JUST A FEW HOURS
AFTER SCALIA'S PASSING THE
PARTISAN FIGHT STARTED TO BREAK
OUT.
FROM YOUR PERSPECTIVE, HOW BIG
OF A SHOWDOWN DO YOU THINK THIS
IS GOING TO BE?
>> THIS IS A MASSIVE SHOWDOWN,
IT'S GOING TO AFFECT CONGRESS,
IT IS GOING TO AFFECT THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
IT IS REALLY A GREAT TREMOR IN
AMERICAN POLITICS.
NOT ONLY BECAUSE OF THE COURT
CASES THAT I KNOW YOUR
INTERVIEWERS ARE FAMILIAR WITH,
BUT BECAUSE OF THE DIVIDE IN
CONGRESS ITSELF, AND I THINK
MITCH MCCONNELL COMING DOWN SO
QUICKLY AS YOU SAID INDICATING
THAT HE ASK NOT EVEN GOING TO
RECEIVE A NOMINATION FROM A
SITTING PRESIDENT, IS REALLY A
DECLARATION OF POLITICAL WAR.
AND NOW THE WHITE HOUSE HAS TO
CONSIDER HOW IT'S GOING TO
RESPOND.
>> I MEAN CAN THE REPUBLICANS IF
THEY SO CHOOSE REALLY BLOCK A
NOMINEE.
IF OBAMA PUTS SOMEONE FORWARD,
CAN THEY REALLY BLOCK THAT
NOMINEE FOR VIRTUALLY AN ENTIRE
YEAR?
>> THEY ABSOLUTELY CAN.
UNDER SENATE PROCEDURE, UNDER
SENATE RULES IT REQUIRES FIRST
OF ALL NOW THREE FIFTHS OR 60
VOTES OR NOMINATIONS OF SUPREME
COURT JUDGES TO MOVE FORWARD.
BUT THEN TO EVEN GET PAST THAT
IT REQUIRES A BASIC MAJORITY
VOTE OF THE SENATE TO APPROVE
ANY SUPREME COURT NOMINEE, SINCE
THEY HAVE A FEW VOTES MORE THAN
A MAJORITY, SENATE REPUBLICANS
HAVE THE POWER TO BLOCK ANY
NOMINEE THEY SO CHOOSE.
AND WHAT I THINK HAS HAPPENED IN
THE PAST HERE, WILLIAM, IS THERE
HAVE BEEN COMPROMISE CHOICES
BEHIND THE NEGOTIATIONS BUT IN
AN ELECTION YEAR WHAT
REPUBLICANS THINK THEY HAVE A
VERY STRONG SHOT AT WINNING THE
PRESIDENCY AND THEN MOREOVER,
WILLIAM, AS POTENTIALLY LOSING
THE SENATE, THEY REALIZE THAT
THEY THINK THEIR BEST SHOT TO
GET ANOTHER SEAT ON THE SUPREME
COURT IS TO WAIT AND DELAY THIS
AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE.
THE PRESIDENT NOW HAS A SORT OF
TRICKY POLITICAL GAME TO PLAY.
DOES HE COME UP WITH THE NOMINEE
THAT SEEMS COMPLETELY UNFAIR FOR
REPUBLICANS TO NOT EVEN CONSIDER
OR DOES HE DO SOME-- DOES HE
COME UP WITH A NOMINEE WHO HE
REALLY WANTS.
HE'S GOT A NUMBER OF OPTIONS
HERE AND IT'S REALLY NOT CLEAR
HOW THIS GETS RESOLVED ANY TIME
SOON.
>> HAVE WE HEARD WHAT HILLARY
CLINTON AND BERNIE SANDERS HAVE
SAID ABOUT THIS YET?
>> NO SURPRISE.
THE TWO DEMOCRATS WANT THE
DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENT TO PICK A
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE AND WANT
IT APPROVED.
BERNIE SANDERS SAYS THE
CONSTITUTION CLEARLY GIVES THE
PRESIDENT THIS POWER.
HILLARY CLINTON SAYS THE
REPUBLICANS ARE OUTRAGE US IN
HER WORDS, THEY'RE PUSHING BACK
REALLY HARD.
>> IS THERE A PRESS DENSE FOR
THIS FOR A SUPREME COURT FIGHT
TO BREAK OUT IN THE MIDDLE OF AN
ELECTION YEAR?
>> THIS IS WHAT IS FASCINATING.
THERE IS ABSOLUTELY NO MODERN
PRESIDENT GOING BACK TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE 20th
CENTURY FOR A SUPREME COURT
JUSTICE DYING IN AN ELECTION
YEAR, IN WHICH A PRESIDENT, A
TWO-TERM PRESIDENT IS RETIRING.
SO YOU HAVE THE SITUATION HERE
THAT IS UNPRECEDENTED.
WE DO HAVE A COUPLE OF
PRECEDENTS IN TERMS OF VACANCIES
IN ELECTION YEARS.
FOR EXAMPLE, WE HAD ONE WITH
PRESIDENT JOHNSON WHERE HE WAS
TRYING TO CONFIRM ABE FORTAS TO
BE THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE
COURT THAT WAS BLOCKED UNTIL
RICHARD NIXON BECAME PRESIDENT.
SO THE SENATE HAS ACTED TO BLOCK
A NOMINEE BUT IN THAT CASE,
INTERESTINGLY ENOUGH, THE
SUPREME COURT DID NOT LOSE A
MEMBER BECAUSE THE SITTING CHIEF
JUSTICE STAYED, KEPT THE SEAT.
SO THERE REALLY IS NOT A
PRECEDENT HERE FOR A POTENTIALLY
OPEN SEAT FOR ALMOST A YEAR IN
BETWEEN PRESIDENTS.
THAT WOULD BE SOMETHING
COMPLETELY NEW.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THE NEWSHOUR'S POLITICAL
COLLECTOR LISA DESJARDINS,
THANK YOU SO SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Brangham: PRESIDENT OBAMA IS
URGING VLADIMIR PUTIN TO HALT
RUSSIAN AIRSTRIKES IN SYRIA
ON MODERATE OPPOSITION FORCES
WHO ARE FIGHTING AGAINST SYRIAN
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS OBAMA
CONVEYED THE MESSAGE IN A PHONE
CALL TO PUTIN YESTERDAY AS THEY
DISCUSSED CEASEFIRE AND
DELIVERED MORE HUMANITARIAN
AID.
NEITHER THE RUSSIAN BACKED
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT OR THE REBEL
FACTIONS HAVE SIGNED THE
CEASEFIRE AGREEMENT BEING
DISCUSSED AT A MULTINATIONAL
SECURITY CONFERENCE IN MUNICH,
GERMANY.
ATTENDING THE CONFERENCE SENATOR
JOHN MCCAIN WHO CHAIRS THE
SENATE ARMED SERVICES COMMITTEE
WARNED A POTENTIAL TRUCE COULD
WEAKEN OPPOSITION FORCES WITHOUT
CEILING THE RUSSIAN AND SYRIAN
MILITARY CAMPAIGNS.
>> NOT ONLY WILL THIS AGREEMENT
FAIL BUT THE WAR IN SYRIA WILL
GRIND ON, MORE INNOCENT PEOPLE
WILL DIE, WESTERN CREDIBILITY
AND INFLUENCE WILL DIMINISH, THE
REFUGEES WILL CONTINUE TO FLOW
OUT, THE TERRORISTS WILL
CONTINUE TO FLOW IN.
>> CIVILIAN CASUALTIES IN
AFGHANISTAN HAVE REACHED THEIR
WORST LEVEL IN SEVEN YEARS.
MORE THAN 11,000 CIVILIANS WERE
KILLED OR WOUNDED IN 2015
ACCORDING TO THE NEW ANNUAL
REPORT FROM THE UNITED NATIONS.
THE REPORT SAYS 3500 CIVILIANS
DIED AND 7500 PEOPLE WERE
WOUNDED LAST YEAR.
AS FIGHTING CONTINUED BETWEEN
AMERICAN-BACKED AFGHAN SECURITY
FORCES AND THE TALIBAN.
THE TOTAL REPRESENTS A 4% RISE
FROM 2014.
ONE QUARTER OF THE CASUAL
-- CASUALTIES WERE CHILDREN.
THE U.N. CITED SUICIDE
BOMBINGS IN THE AFGHAN CAPITOL
OF KABUL AND THE TAKEOVER OF
KUNDUZ AS FACTORS FOR THE
INCREASE.
>> Brangham: THE DEATH OF
JUSTICE SCALIA WAS THE FOCUS OF
THE START OF LAST NIGHT'S
PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE AMONG THE
SIX REPUBLICAN CANDIDATES IN
SOUTH CAROLINA, WHERE THE NEXT
PRIMARY WILL BE HELD NEXT
SATURDAY.
THE REPUBLICANS WERE UNITED IN
CALLING ON SENATE LEADERS TO
BLOCK ANY SUPREME COURT
NOMINATION BY PRESIDENT OBAMA.
>> I THINK IT'S UP TO MITCH
MCCONNELL, AND EVERYBODY ELSE TO
STOP IT.
IT'S CALLED DELAY, DELAY, DELAY.
>> Brangham: TED CRUZ
UNDERSCORED THE STAKES OF THIS
COURT VACANCY FOR CONSERVATIVES.
>> WE ARE ONE JUSTICE AWAY FROM
A SUPREME COURT THAT WILL STRIKE
DOWN EVERY RESTRICTION ON
ABORTION ADOPTED BY THE STATES.
WE ARE ONE JUSTICE AWAY FROM A
SUPREME COURT THAT WILL REVERSE
THE HELLER DECISION, ONE OF
JUSTICE SCALIA'S SEMINAL
DECISIONS, THAT UPHELD THE
SECOND AMENDMENT RIGHT TO KEEP
AND TO BEAR ARMS.
>> Brangham: ON FOREIGN POLICY,
JEB BUSH AGAIN SAID THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS FAILED TO
CONTAIN ISIS.
>> IT'S A COMPLETE, UNMITIGATED
DISASTER.
AND TO ALLOW RUSSIA NOW TO HAVE
INFLUENCE IN SYRIA MAKES IT
HARDER, BUT WE NEED TO DESTROY
ISIS AND DISPOSE OF ASSAD TO
CREATE A STABLE SYRIA SO THAT
THE FOUR MILLION REFUGEES AREN'T
A BREEDING GROUND FOR ISLAMIC
JIHADISTS.
>> JEB IS SO WRONG.
>> Brangham: BUT DONALD TRUMP
DISAGREED THAT RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN COULD NOT BE AN
ALLY IN THAT FIGHT.
>> THAT'S WHY WE'VE BEEN IN THE
MIDDLE EAST FOR 15 YEARS, AND WE
HAVEN'T WON ANYTHING.
WE'VE SPENT $5 TRILLION IN THE
MIDDLE EAST WITH THINKING LIKE
THAT.
>> Brangham: BUSH REBUTTED
TRUMP'S ATTACKS ON HIS FATHER
AND BROTHER'S HANDLING OF THE
REGION DURING THEIR
PRESIDENCIES.
>> I AM SICK AND TIRED OF HIM
GOING AFTER MY FAMILY.
MY DAD IS THE GREATEST MAN ALIVE
IN MY MIND.
AND WHILE DONALD TRUMP WAS
BUILDING A REALITY TV SHOW, MY
BROTHER WAS BUILDING A SECURITY
APPARATUS TO KEEP US SAFE.
AND I'M PROUD OF WHAT HE DID.
(APPLAUSE)
>> THE WORLD TRADE CENTER CAME
DOWN DURING YOUR BROTHER'S
REIGN, REMEMBER THAT.
>> Brangham: TO HELP US FACT
CHECK THE DEBATE, I AM JOINED
FROM WASHINGTON BY JON GREENBERG
OF "POLITIFACT," AN INDEPENDENT,
NON-PARTISAN PROJECT OVERSEEN BY
THE "TAMPA BAY TIMES."
JON, THE DEATH OF SCALIA WAS
ANNOUNCED ONLY A FEW HOURS
BEFORE THE CANDIDATES TOOK
THE STAGE LAST NIGHT BUT ALL THE
REPUBLICANS RUNNING SAID
PRESIDENT OBAMA SHOULD NOT
NOMINATE SOMEONE THIS ELECTION
YEAR.
AND IF HE DID, THE REPUBLICANS
SAID THAT THE SENATE SHOULD
BLOCK IT.
HERE'S HOW MARCO RUBIO PUT IT.
>> I DO NOT BELIEVE THE
PRESIDENT SHOULD APPOINT
SOMEONE.
AND IT'S NOT UNPRECEDENTED.
IN FACT, IT'S BEEN OVER 80 YEARS
SINCE A LAME DUCK PRESIDENT HAS
APPOINTED A SUPREME COURT
JUSTICE.
>> IS RUBIO RIGHT, 80 YEARS
SINCE A SIMILAR SITUATION HAS
OCCURRED.
>> YOU KNOW, THE NUMBER 80 YEARS
WAS KICKING AROUND REALLY FAST
IN THE TWITTERSPHERE RIGHT
BEFORE THE DEBATE AND THE
PROBLEM WITH USING THAT NUMBER
ASIDE FROM THE FACT IT IS A
LITTLE BIT OFF NO MATTER HOW YOU
LOOK AT IT, THE PROBLEM IS, IS
THAT RUBIO USED THE TERM LAME
DUCK PRESIDENT.
AND SO WHEN YOU HAVE GOT A
PRESIDENT WHO IS TERM-LIMITED,
SO THEY ARE IN THEIR SECOND
TERM, ALL YOU HAVE TO DO IS GO
BACK TO RONALD REAGAN.
IN 1987 AND '88, '88 IS AN
ELECTION YEAR.
AND IN 1987, RONALD REAGAN
NOMINATES ANTHONY KENNEDY TO BE
ON THE SUPREME COURT.
AND HE, KENNEDY IS THEN
CONFIRMED IN 88EE.
SO THERE IS REAGAN.
HE'S CLEARLY ON HIS WAY OUT.
HE DOESN'T KNOW WHO HIS
SUCCESSOR IS.
AND HE PUTS SOMEBODY ON THE
SUPREME COURT.
THAT REALLY IS QUITE RECENT.
IN RELATIVE TERMS.
AND SO RUBIO IS MOSTLY FALSE ON
THIS ONE.
>> MOSTLY FALSE.
OKAY.
IN A FOREIGN POLICY SECTION OF
THE DEBATE LAST NIGHT NEW
HAMPSHIRE PRIMARY WINNER DONALD
TRUMP WHO HAS NEVER HELD PUBLIC
OFFICE SAID AS HE HAS BEFORE,
THAT HE OPPOSED THE 2003 U.S.
INVASION OF IRAQ.
HERE IS WHAT HE SAID.
>> I'M THE ONLY ONE ON THIS
STAGE THAT SAID DO NOT GO INTO
IRAQ.
DO NOT ATTACK IRAQ.
NOBODY ELSE ON THE STAGE SAID
THAT AND I SAID IT LOUD AND
STRONG.
AND I WAS IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
I WASN'T A POLITICIAN.
>> JOHN, IS THAT RIGHT?
IS THERE ANY PROOF THAT TRUMP
SAID THAT BACK IN 2003?
>> NO, HE DID NOT SAY IT, SO FAR
AS WE KNOW, GOING THROUGH
TRANSCRIPTS AND RECORDS.
THAT HE SAID IT BEFORE THE WAR.
ABOUT THREE MONTHS BEFORE WE
ACTUALLY INVADED, SO REALLY
THERE WAS A BIG RUN-UP THERE
WHEN THERE WERE PROTESTS AND SO
FORTH.
HE WAS INTERVIEWED ON FOX NEWS.
HE WAS ASKED, OH, WELL, WHAT IS
UP WITH PRESIDENT BUSH, SHOULD
HE FOCUS MORE ON IRAQ, FOCUS
MORE ON THE ECONOMY.
AND THE MOST THAT TRUMP SAID
WELL, YOU KNOW, PERHAPS MAYBE WE
SHOULD WAIT FOR THE U.N. TO GET
ON BOARD HERE.
BUT REALLY, THE ECONOMY IS WHERE
HE SHOULD FOCUS HIS ATTENTION.
AND IT WASN'T UNTIL A WEEK AFTER
THE INVASION THAT HE SAID IN
SOME BRIEF INTERVIEW THAT IT WAS
A MESS.
AND IT WAS ABOUT A YEAR AFTER
THE INVASION THAT IT REALLY-- HE
REALLY CAME DOWN HARD.
SO IN TERMS OF HOW FORCEFULLY HE
PUT IT, TRUMP REALLY DID RATE
FALSE.
HE WAS NOT LOUD AND CLEAR BEFORE
THE INVASION ABOUT ALL THE BAD
THINGS THAT WOULD HAPPEN.
AT LEAST IN TERMS OF ANY RECORD
THAT WE CAN FIND.
>> ALL RIGHT.
LAST ONE, JOHN KASICH IN HIS
SECOND TERM AS OHIO'S GOVERNOR
TOUTED HIS ECONOMIC RECORD,
CUTTING TAXES, GROWING JOBS AND
BALANCING THE BUDGET HERE'S
WHAT HE SAID.
>> WHAT I WOULD TELL YOU IS WE
HAVE GONE FROM AN $8 BILLION
HOLE TO A $2 BILLION SURPLUS.
>> SO JOHN, HOW DID THAT CHECK
OUT.
DID HE TURN OHIO DEFICIT INTO A
SURPLUS.
>> ASIDE FROM THE FACT THAT YOU
REALLY CAN'T GIVE JOHN KASICH
CREDIT FOR ANYTHING.
BIG ECONOMIC TRENDS PLAY A BIG
ROLE HERE, STILL THE NUMBERS
BASICALLY DO WORK OUT.
BECAUSE THERE WAS A PROJECTED $8
BILLION DEFICIT.
AND THEN BY 2015, THE STATE'S
RAINY DAY FUND SAID HEY, WE'VE
GOT $2 BILLION TO TIDE US OVER.
THAT CERTAINLY COUNTS AS A
SURPLUS.
SO YEAH, MR. KASICH GETS IT
RIGHT.
>> ALL RIGHT, JON GREENBERG FROM
"POLITIFACT," THANKS AS ALWAYS
SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE THIS IS PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SUNDAY.
FINALLY TONIGHT THE WHITE HOUSE
SAID PRESIDENT OBAMA DOES PLAN
TO NOMINATE A REPLACEMENT FOR
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE ANTONIN
SCALIA IN DUE TIME BUT NOT
BEFORE THE SENATE RETURNED FROM
ITS RECESS ON FEBRUARY 22nd.
OBAMA SPOKESMAN ERIC SCHULTZ
ADDED "AT THAT POINT WE
EXPECT THE SENATE TO CONSIDER
THAT NOMINEE CONSISTENT WITH
THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES LAID OUT
IN THE UNITED STATES
CONSTITUTION."
THAT IS ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM, GOOD
NIGHT.